Factors suggesting diagnosis of depression over dementia
short history, rapid onset
biological symptoms e.g. weight loss, sleep disturbance
patient worried about poor memory
reluctant to take tests, disappointed with results
mini-mental test score: variable
global memory loss (dementia characteristically causes recent memory loss)

Depression: NICE guidelines on management 
NICE updated its depression guidelines in 2022. It now favours a simple classification of depression severity
'less severe' depression: encompasses what was previously termed subthreshold and mild depression
a PHQ-9 score of < 16
'more severe' depression: encompasses what was previously termed moderate and severe depression
a PHQ-9 score of ≥ 16

The NICE guidelines are long and contain many important principles about dealing with patients who have depression. The following is a very brief section highlighting key points.

Management of less severe depression

NICE lists a large number of interventions that may be used first-line. It encourages us to discuss treatment options with patients to reach a shared decision. They recommend considering 'the least intrusive and least resource intensive treatment first'. It also recommends not routinely offering 'antidepressant medication as first-line treatment for less severe depression, unless that is the person's preference'.

Treatment options, listed in order of preference by NICE
guided self-help
group cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
group behavioural activation (BA)
individual CBT
individual BA
group exercise
group mindfulness and meditation
interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
counselling
short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy (STPP)

Management of more severe depression

Again, NICE recommend a shared decision should be made.

Treatment options, listed in order of preference by NICE
a combination of individual cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and an antidepressant
individual CBT
individual behavioural activation (BA)
antidepressant medication
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), or
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), or
another antidepressant if indicated based on previous clinical and treatment history
individual problem-solving
counselling
short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy (STPP)
interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
guided self-help
group exercise


Depression: screening and assessment 
Screening

The following two questions can be used to screen for depression
'During the last month, have you often been bothered by feeling down, depressed or hopeless?'
'During the last month, have you often been bothered by having little interest or pleasure in doing things?'

A 'yes' answer to either of the above should prompt a more in depth assessment.

Assessment

There are many tools to assess the degree of depression including the Hospital Anxiety and Depression (HAD) scale and the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9).

Hospital Anxiety and Depression (HAD) scale
consists of 14 questions, 7 for anxiety and 7 for depression
each item is scored from 0-3
produces a score out of 21 for both anxiety and depression
severity: 0-7 normal, 8-10 borderline, 11+ case
patients should be encouraged to answer the questions quickly

Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9)
asks patients 'over the last 2 weeks, how often have you been bothered by any of the following problems?'
9 items which can then be scored 0-3
includes items asking about thoughts of self-harm

Traditionally, depression severity has been grouped under 4 categories (subthreshold, mild, moderate and severe). The updated NICE guideline uses a simpler 2 category definition of depression: less severe or more severe depression.

Less severe depression encompasses subthreshold and mild depression, and more severe depression encompasses moderate and severe depression. Thresholds on validated scales were used in this guideline as an indicator of severity
a score < 16 on the PHQ-9: less severe depression
a score of ≥ 16 on the PHQ-9: severe depression

The DSM-5 also provides criteria for diagnosing major depressive disorder (MDD), commonly referred to as depression.

Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) DSM-5 Criteria:

Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (either by subjective account or as observed by others).
Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.



Depression: switching antidepressants 
The Maudsley hospital guidelines recommend the following:

Switching from citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, or paroxetine to another SSRI
direct switch is possible

Switching from fluoxetine to another SSRI
withdraw then leave a gap of 4-7 days (as it has a long half-life) before starting a low dose of the alternative SSRI

Switching from an SSRI to a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA)
cross-tapering is recommended (the current drug dose is reduced slowly, whilst the dose of the new drug is increased slowly)
- an exception is fluoxetine which should be withdrawn, the leave a gap of 4-7 days prior to TCAs being started at a low dose

Switching from citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, or paroxetine to venlafaxine
direct switch is possible (caution if paroxetine used)

Switching from fluoxetine to venlafaxine
withdraw and then start venlafaxine at a low dose 4–7 days later
